EPISTULAE AD FAMILIARES, ΙΙΙ. 1x.

arrears of what you promised and have already given
me. Not only am I anxious to perfect myself in the
study of augural law forits own sake, but you cannot
think how delighted I am with your kind attentions
and gifts. But you say you long to have something
of the same sort from me ; well, Ι must really con-
sider by what style of composition I may best requite
your kindness ; for it would certainly be unlike me,
who, to your frequent surprise, put such a lot of
hard work into my writing‚ to make the mistake of
letting you think that I had been slovenly in my
writing, especially when I should probably be accused
not only of slovenliness but also of ingratitude.‘¹
That, however, I will see to. As to your other 4
promise, I should be glad if in conformity with your
loyalty and sincere consideration for me, and in the
name of friendship that is of no recent date, but has
stood the test of years, you would make it your care
and spare no effort to secure my having a “ thanks-
giving '’ decreed me, and that in the most com-
plimentary terms, and at as early a date as possible.
I have been later altogether in sending my dispatch
than I could have wished ; and in that not only was
Ι plagued with difficulties in finding a ship, but I
believe that the Senate was prorogued at the very
time my dispatch arrived.⁶ But it was at your
instance and by your advice that I did so; and I -
think I acted aright in not sending my dispatch
immediately upon my winning the title of imperator,
but after the performance of other services and the
completion of the summer campaign. You will, there-
fore, Ι am sure, attend to all this as you declare you
will, and regard as commended to your care all there
is of me, and all I have, and those belonging to me.

215

