⁶ EPISTULAE AD FAMILIARES, V. xx.

credit for the modicum of intelligence Ι possess--I
say of my generosity, in that you prefer to attribute
the deliverance of my legate and my prefect [Q.
Lepta] from a very grave disaster (and that, too,
although they should not have been made liable at
all) to the good services of my secretary rather than
to mine—of my assiduity, in that you believe that Ι
had neither any knowledge of my duty, nor had given
any thought to it, important as it was, or even to my
persona] danger, serious as it was ; that it was my
secretary who inserted whatever he pleased in the
accounts without having so much as read it over to
me—of my intelligence‚ in that you imagine Ι had
never even thought about a matter which Ι had
actually thought out with no little penetration ; for
not only was it my own idea to set Volusius free, but
it was also Ι who invented the scheme for saving
Valerius’s sureties and T. Marius himself from being
so heavily mulcted—a scheme not only un1versally
approved, but universally applauded ; indeed, if you
want to know the truth‚ my secretary was the only
man, so far as Ι gathered, who was not particularly
pleased about it.

But Ι thought it a point of honour, as long as the
people kept what belonged to it, to look after the
interests of so many—well, you may call them either
friends or fellowfflitizens.

Now as to Lucceius, it was arranged at the instance
of Pompey, that that money should be lodged in a
temple ; a that, as I have acknowledged, was done by

This passage, especially§ 9, is very interesting as showing
that Pompey and the other optimates had already been
'‘lx'lssilsshlllg preparations in the East for the conflict with Caesar.''

413

