EPISTULAE ADFAMILIARES, V. 11.

„Now though Ι had suffered so notable an insult, 8
nevertheless, on that very day I sent some common
friends of ours to Metellus to entreat him to abandon
his intention3 but his answer to them was that he
had already committed himself. And he had, as a
matter of fact, not long before publicly declared
that a man who had punished others without a trial
ought not himself to be granted the privilege of
making a speech.

What a sterling character l What a peerless
patriot! For, in his· judgment, the man who had
delivered the Senate-house from massacre, the City
from incendiarism, and Italy from war, deserved the
same ‘punishment as that inflicted by the Senate,
with the unanimous approval of all honest men, upon
those who had purposed to fire the City, butcher the
magistrates and the Senate, and fan the flames of a
devastating war. And so I defied your brother
Metellus ‘to his face. For on the lst of J anuary I
so dealt with him in the Senate on the political
situation, as to convince him that the man with whom
he would have to fight lacked neither courage nor
determination. On the 3rd of January, when he
began to'develop his proposal,“ every other word of
his speech was a challenge or a threat to me, and he
had no more deliberate purpose in mind, than by
any means in his power, not by legal procedure or
fair argument, but by brute force and browbeating,
to effect the overthrow of myself. Had I not stood
up to him, in his hot-headed attack upon me, with
some courage and spirit, who in all the world would
not suspect that the fortitude I showed in my
consulship was due to accident rather than to policy?

If you were not aware that Metellus harboured 9

331

