EPISTULAE AD FAMILIARES, Ι. IX.

rioting‚ on disregarding the auspices, and on the
bestowal of royal titles. ‚
And not in this trial only did Ι (10 so, but con· 8
sistently and frequently in the Senate. Nay, more
than that, in the consulship of Marcellinus and
Philippus‚⁰ on the 5th of April, it was my proposal
which the Senate accepted that the question of the
Campanian land should be laid before a full Senate
on the l5th of May. Could Ι have more uncom-
promisingly invaded the very stronghold of the
triumvirs’ party, or more completely forgotten the
days of my trouble and recalled the days of my
power? The result of this expression of my opinion
was a highly excited state of mind not only among
those who naturally ought to feel excited, but also
among those whom I had never expected to be so.⁶
For when a decree of the Senate had been passed 9

on the lines of my motion, Pompey, though he
had shown me no sign that he was offended, set out
for Sardinia and Africa, and on the journey visited
Caesar at Luca. There Caesar took exception to my
motion in many respects,-since at Ravenna also,
before that, he had seen Crassus, who had roused
his hot indignation against me. It was common
knowledge that Pompey was greatly annoyed at my
proposal, as Ι had been told by others, but most
particularly by my brother. When Pompey met
him in Sardinia a few days after he had left Luca
he said, ‘¹ You are the very man I want to see!
nothing could have happened more opportunely!
Unless you remonstrate seriously with your brother,
you must pay up what you guaranteed me on his

’⁹ c
be'll'lilfcut the story short, he complained bstterly,

55

